# 矩moments

## expectation

$E[X]=\left(\sum_{x: p(x)>0} x p(x)\right)$

从第 3 章中已经了解了, 如果 $X$ 是以 $F(x)$ 为分布函数的随机变量, 则当
$$
\mathbf{E}|X|:=\int_{-\infty}^{\infty}|x| \mathrm{d} F(x)<\infty
$$
即 $|x|$ 在实轴上关于 $F(x)$ R-S 可积时, 称 $X$ 的数学期望 $\mathbf{E} X$ 存在, 且有
$$
\mathbf{E} X:=\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} x \mathrm{~d} F(x) \text {. }
$$
我们认为数学期望Ex就是X的平均数

E(aX+b)=aE(X)+b

## property

Proposition. $\quad E[g(X, Y)]=\sum_{x} \sum_{y} g(x, y) p(x, y)$
$E[g(X, Y)]=\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} g(x, y) f(x, y) d x d y$
An important implication is
$$
\begin{aligned}
E[X+Y] &=\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} \int_{-\infty}^{\infty}(x+y) f(x, y) d x d y \\
&=\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} x f(x, y) d x d y+\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} y f(x, y) d x d y \\
&=\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} x f_{X}(x) d x+\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} y f_{Y}(y) d y \\
&=E[X]+E[Y]
\end{aligned}
$$

这里X,Y可以不独立，但是

If $X$ and $Y$ are independent, then
$$
\begin{aligned}
E[X Y] &=\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} x y f(x, y) d x d y \\
&=\int_{-\infty}^{\infty} \int_{-\infty}^{\infty} x y f_{X}(x) f_{Y}(y) d x d y \\
&=E[X] E[Y]
\end{aligned}
$$

## expectation

shape of distribution:  p<0.5 , right‐skewed;p >0.5, left‐skewed
with n increase ，更加对称
我们认为np$\geq 5$且$nq\geq 5$（q=1-p)二项分布可以认为是正态分布
X~N(np,npq) ->X-np/sqrt(npq)~N(0,1) ->n\bar{p}-np/sqrt(npq)~N(0,1)上下同除以n,所以
$\hat{p} \sim N\left(p, \frac{p q}{n}\right) \Rightarrow Z=\frac{\hat{p}-p}{\sqrt{\frac{p q}{n}}} \sim N(0,1)$

## variance

$VAR(X)=E(X-EX)^2=E（X^2)-(EX)^2$

$\sqrt{VAR(X)}=\sigma$,which is called standard deviation

# Covariance

The covariance between two random variables is a measure of how they are related.
Definition: The covariance between $X$ and $Y$, denoted by $\operatorname{Cov}(X, Y)$, is defined by $\operatorname{Cov}(X, Y)=E[(X-E[X])(Y-E[Y])]$.
By expanding the right hand side of the definition of the covariance, we see that
$$
\begin{aligned}
& \operatorname{Cov}(X, Y) \\
=& E[(X-E[X])(Y-E[Y])]=E\{X Y-E[X] Y-X E[Y]+E[X] E[Y]\} \\
=& E[X Y]-E[X] E[Y]-E[X] E[Y]+E[X] E[Y]=E[X Y]-E[X] E[Y]
\end{aligned}
$$

Definition: If $\operatorname{Cov}(X, Y)=0$, we say $X$ and $Y$ are uncorrelated. If $\operatorname{Cov}(X, Y)>0$, we say $X$ and $Y$ are positively correlated. If $\operatorname{Cov}(X, Y)<0$, we say $X$ and $Y$ are negatively correlated.

So the previous calculation tells us that independence implies uncorrelatedness.
We have
Proposition: If $X$ and $Y$ are independent, then for any functions of $g$ and $h, g(X)$ and $h(Y)$ are independent.
(i) $\operatorname{Cov}(X, Y)=\operatorname{Cov}(Y, X)$
(ii) $\operatorname{Cov}(X, X)=\operatorname{Var}(X)$
(iii) $\operatorname{Cov}(a X, b Y)=a b \operatorname{Cov}(X, Y)$
(iv) $\operatorname{Cov}\left(\sum_{i=1}^{n} X_{i}, \sum_{j=1}^{m} Y_{j}\right)=\sum_{i=1}^{n} \sum_{j=1}^{m} \operatorname{Cov}\left(X_{i}, Y_{j}\right)$
(v) $\operatorname{Var}\left(\sum_{i=1}^{n} X_{i}\right)=\sum_{i=1}^{n} \operatorname{Var}\left(X_{i}\right)+2 \sum_{i<j} \operatorname{Cov}\left(X_{i}, X_{j}\right)$
(vi) if $X_{1}, X_{2}, \ldots, X_{n}$ are pairwise independent, $\operatorname{Var}\left(\sum_{i=1}^{n} X_{i}\right)=\sum_{i=1}^{n} \operatorname{Var}\left(X_{i}\right)$
Thus two events are independent if and only if the corresponding indicator variables are uncorrelated. In other words, for indicator variables, independence and uncorrelatedness are equivalent.

## skewness

Skewness is a measure of the degree of asymmetry of a distribution. If the left [tail](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/Tail.html) (tail at small end of the distribution) is more pronounced（哪边的尾巴更显著） than the right tail (tail at the large end of the distribution), the function is said to have [negative](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/Negative.html) skewness. If the reverse is true, it has [positive](https://mathworld.wolfram.com/Positive.html) skewness. If the two are equal, it has zero skewness.

$\gamma_{1}=\frac{\mu_{3}}{\mu_{2}^{3 / 2}},$$\text { where } \mu_{i} \text { is the } i \text { th central moment. }$

实际上判断skewness看$\mu_3$正负即可，<0就是left，>0就是right

# quartile

### interquartile range
Quartiles split the ranked data into 4 segments with an equal number of values per segment（按照个数)
Q1position:(n+1)/4
Q2position：2(n+1)/4
When calculating the ranked position, use the following rules:
 If the result is a whole number, it is the ranked position to use
If the result is a fractional half (e.g. 2.5, 8.5,...), average the two corresponding data values
f the result is not a whole number or a fractional half, round the result to the nearest integer to find the ranked position
Interquartile range is Q3-Q1 and measures the spread in the middle 50% of the data
Interquartile range is also called the midspread because it covers the middle 50% of the data
Not influenced by outliers or extreme values（不会被极端情况或者极端数据影响）

